ARROW-6419: [Website] Blog post about Parquet C++ read performance improvements in Arrow 0.15 (#19)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2019-09-03-faster-strings-cpp-parquet.md

categories: [application]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

We have been implementing a series of optimizations in the Apache Parquet C++
internals to improve read and write efficiency (both performance and memory
use) for Arrow columnar binary and string types, including native support for
Arrow's dictionary types. This should have a big impact on users of the C++,
MATLAB, Python, R, and Ruby interfaces to Parquet files.

> We discuss the work that was done and show benchmarks comparing Arrow 0.11.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post reviews the work that was done and shows benchmarks comparing Arrow 0.11.0
```

(released in October, 2018) with the current development version (to be
released soon as Arrow 0.15.0).

# Summary of work

> One of the challenges of developing the Parquet C++ library is that we

Reviewer: I'd move this paragraph to after the list of Jiras. This is an odd way to start a "summary"

decoding Parquet files' internal dictionary-encoded data streams to and from
Arrow's in-memory dictionary-encoded `DictionaryArray`
representation. Dictionary encoding is a compression strategy in Parquet, and
there is no formal "dictionary" or "categorical" type. I will go into more
detail about this below.

Some of the particular JIRA issues related to this work include:

- Vectorize comparators for computing statistics ([PARQUET-1523][1])
- Read binary directly data directly into DictionaryBuilder<T>
  ([ARROW-3769][2])
- Writing Parquet's dictionary indices directly into DictionaryBuilder<T>
  ([ARROW-3772][3])
- Write dense (non-dictionary) Arrow arrays directly into Parquet data encoders
  ([ARROW-6152][4])
- Direct writing of arrow::DictionaryArray to Parquet column writers ([ARROW-3246][5])
- Supporting changing dictionaries ([ARROW-3144][6])
- Internal IO optimizations and improved raw `BYTE_ARRAY` encoding performance
  ([ARROW-4398][7])

# Background: how Parquet files do dictionary encoding

Many direct and indirect users of Apache Arrow use dictionary encoding to
improve performance and memory use on binary or string data types that include

> many repeated values. pandas users will know this as the [Categorical type][8]

Reviewer: lowercase "pandas" reads odd to start a sentence

Author: Lowercase is the official styling of the project name =)

Reviewer: Yes, I figured, just observing that it looks odd as the start of a sentence, e.e. cummings style.

while in R such encoding is known as [`factor`][9]. In the Arrow C++ library
and various bindings we have the `DictionaryArray` object for representing such
data in memory.

For example, an array such as

```
['apple', 'orange', 'apple', NULL, 'orange', 'orange']
```

has dictionary-encoded form

```
dictionary: ['apple', 'orange']
indices: [0, 1, 0, NULL, 1, 1]
```

The [Parquet format uses dictionary encoding][10] to compress data, and it is
used for all Parquet data types, not just binary or string data. Parquet
further uses bit-packing and run-length encoding (RLE) to compress the
dictionary indices, so if you had data like

```
['apple', 'apple', 'apple', 'apple', 'apple', 'apple', 'orange']
```

the indices would be encoded like

```
[rle-run=(6, 0),
 bit-packed-run=[1]]
```

The full details of the rle-bitpacking encoding are found in the Parquet

> specification.

Reviewer: Link to that please

When writing a Parquet file, most implementations will use dictionary encoding
to compress a column until the dictionary itself reaches a certain size
threshold, usually around 1 megabyte. At this point, the column writer will
"fall back" to `PLAIN` encoding where values are written end-to-end in "data
pages" and then usually compressed with Snappy or Gzip. See the following rough
diagram:

<div align="center">
<img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903-parquet-dictionary-column-chunk.png"
     alt="Internal ColumnChunk structure"
     width="80%" class="img-responsive">
</div>

> When reading a Parquet file, the dictionary-encoded portions are usually

Reviewer: This seems to start a new section, where you've moved on from "background" and are starting to discuss your optimizations.

is to skip this "dense" materialization. There are several issues to deal with:

* A Parquet file often contains multiple ColumnChunks for each semantic column,
  and the dictionary values may be different in each ColumnChunk
* We must gracefully handle the "fall back" portion which is not
  dictionary-encoded

We pursued several avenues to help with this:

* Allowing each `arrow::DictionaryArray` to have a different dictionary
  (before, the dictionary was part of the `DictionaryType`, which caused
  problems)
* We enabled the Parquet dictionary indices to be directly written into an
  Arrow `DictionaryBuilder` without rehashing the data
* When decoding a ColumnChunk, we first append the dictionary values and
  indices into an Arrow `DictionaryBuilder`, and when we encounter the "fall
  back" portion we use a hash table to convert those values to
  dictionary-encoded form
* We override the "fall back" logic when writing a ColumnChunk from an
  `arrow::DictionaryArray` so that reading such data back is more efficient

All of these things together have produced some excellent performance results
that we will detail below.

> # Pushing Arrow columnar read and write lower in the Parquet stack

Reviewer: This section header probably should go away if you start the performance-improvements section above, where I suggested.

The other class of optimizations we implemented was removing an abstraction
layer between the low-level Parquet column data encoder and decoder classes and
the Arrow columnar data structures. This involves:

* Adding `ColumnWriter::WriteArrow` and `Encoder::Put` methods that accept
  `arrow::Array` objects directly
* Adding `ByteArrayDecoder::DecodeArrow` method to decode binary data directly
  into an `arrow::BinaryBuilder`.

While the performance improvements from this work are less dramatic than for
dictionary-encoded data, they are still meaningful in real-world applications.

# Performance Benchmarks

> We run some benchmarks comparing Arrow 0.11.1 with the current master

Reviewer: Use the past tense? (We ran, we constructed, etc.)

branch. We construct two kinds of Arrow tables with 10 columns each:

* "Low cardinality" and "high cardinality" variants. The "low cardinality" case
  has 1,000 unique string values of 32-bytes each. The "high cardinality" has
  100,000 unique values
* "Dense" (non-dictionary) and "Dictionary" variants

> [Click here is the full benchmark script.][11]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the full benchmark script [here][11].
```

We show both single-threaded and multithreaded read performance. The test
machine is an Intel i9-9960X using gcc 8.3.0 (on Ubuntu 18.04) with 16 physical
cores and 32 virtual cores.

First, the writing benchmarks:

<div align="center">
<img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903_parquet_write_perf.png"
     alt="Parquet write benchmarks"
     width="80%" class="img-responsive">
</div>

> Here we note that writing `arrow::DictionaryArray` is dramatically faster due

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing `arrow::DictionaryArray` is dramatically faster due
```

to the optimizations described above. We have achieved a small improvement in
writing dense (non-dictionary) binary arrays.

Then, the reading benchmarks:

<div align="center">
<img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903_parquet_read_perf.png"
     alt="Parquet read benchmarks"
     width="80%" class="img-responsive">
</div>

Here, similarly reading `DictionaryArray` directly is many times faster.

> In these benchmarks we note that reading the dense binary data is slower in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These benchmarks show that reading the dense binary data is slower in the
```

master branch than in version 0.11.0, so we will need to do some profiling and
see what we can do to bring read performance back inline. Optimizing the dense
read path has not been too much of a priority relative to the dictionary read
path in this work.

# Memory Use Improvements

In addition to faster performance, reading columns as dictionary-encoded can
yield significantly less memory use.

In the `dict-random` case above, we found that the master branch uses 405 MB of
RAM at peak while loading a 152 MB dataset. In v0.11.1, loading the same
Parquet file without the accelerated dictionary support uses 1.94 GB of peak

> memory while the resulting non-dictionary table occupies 1.01 GB.

Reviewer: Isn't there an even bigger difference when compared with 0.14?

Author: I'll mention that 0.14.x has a nasty bug in it

One of the largest and most complex optimizations involves encoding and
decoding Parquet files' internal dictionary-encoded data streams to and from
Arrow's in-memory dictionary-encoded `DictionaryArray`
representation. Dictionary encoding is a compression strategy in Parquet, and
there is no formal "dictionary" or "categorical" type. I will go into more
detail about this below.

Some of the particular JIRA issues related to this work include:

- Vectorize comparators for computing statistics ([PARQUET-1523][1])
- Read binary directly data directly into DictionaryBuilder<T>
  ([ARROW-3769][2])
- Writing Parquet's dictionary indices directly into DictionaryBuilder<T>
  ([ARROW-3772][3])
- Write dense (non-dictionary) Arrow arrays directly into Parquet data encoders
  ([ARROW-6152][4])
- Direct writing of arrow::DictionaryArray to Parquet column writers ([ARROW-3246][5])
- Supporting changing dictionaries ([ARROW-3144][6])
- Internal IO optimizations and improved raw `BYTE_ARRAY` encoding performance
  ([ARROW-4398][7])

One of the challenges of developing the Parquet C++ library is that we
maintain low-level read and write APIs that do not involve the Arrow columnar

> data structures. So we have had to take care to do Arrow-related optimizations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data structures. So we have had to take care implement Arrow-related optimizations
```

without impacting non-Arrow Parquet users, which includes database systems like
Clickhouse and Vertica.

# Background: how Parquet files do dictionary encoding

Many direct and indirect users of Apache Arrow use dictionary encoding to
improve performance and memory use on binary or string data types that include

> many repeated values. pandas users will know this as the [Categorical type][8]

Reviewer 2: Shameless plug...

```suggestion
many repeated values. MATLAB and pandas users will know this as the [Categorical type][8]
```

Can add link to this doc page too:

https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/categorical-arrays.html

Sorry this messes up the citation numbering...

to compress a column until the dictionary itself reaches a certain size
threshold, usually around 1 megabyte. At this point, the column writer will
"fall back" to `PLAIN` encoding where values are written end-to-end in "data
pages" and then usually compressed with Snappy or Gzip. See the following rough
diagram:

<div align="center">
<img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903-parquet-dictionary-column-chunk.png"
     alt="Internal ColumnChunk structure"
     width="80%" class="img-responsive">
</div>

# Faster reading and writing of dictionary-encoded data

When reading a Parquet file, the dictionary-encoded portions are usually
materialized to their non-dictionary-encoded form, causing binary or string
values to be duplicated in memory. So an obvious (but not trivial) optimization
is to skip this "dense" materialization. There are several issues to deal with:

* A Parquet file often contains multiple ColumnChunks for each semantic column,
  and the dictionary values may be different in each ColumnChunk
* We must gracefully handle the "fall back" portion which is not
  dictionary-encoded

We pursued several avenues to help with this:

> * Allowing each `arrow::DictionaryArray` to have a different dictionary

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to drop the arrow namespace and use `DictionaryArray` throughout the post:

```suggestion
* Allowing each `DictionaryArray` to have a different dictionary
```

  (before, the dictionary was part of the `DictionaryType`, which caused
  problems)
* We enabled the Parquet dictionary indices to be directly written into an
  Arrow `DictionaryBuilder` without rehashing the data
* When decoding a ColumnChunk, we first append the dictionary values and
  indices into an Arrow `DictionaryBuilder`, and when we encounter the "fall
  back" portion we use a hash table to convert those values to
  dictionary-encoded form
* We override the "fall back" logic when writing a ColumnChunk from an

>   `arrow::DictionaryArray` so that reading such data back is more efficient

Reviewer 2: Same thing here:

```suggestion
 `DictionaryArray` so that reading such data back is more efficient
```

layer between the low-level Parquet column data encoder and decoder classes and
the Arrow columnar data structures. This involves:

* Adding `ColumnWriter::WriteArrow` and `Encoder::Put` methods that accept
  `arrow::Array` objects directly
* Adding `ByteArrayDecoder::DecodeArrow` method to decode binary data directly
  into an `arrow::BinaryBuilder`.

While the performance improvements from this work are less dramatic than for
dictionary-encoded data, they are still meaningful in real-world applications.

# Performance Benchmarks

We ran some benchmarks comparing Arrow 0.12.1 with the current master
branch. We construct two kinds of Arrow tables with 10 columns each:

* "Low cardinality" and "high cardinality" variants. The "low cardinality" case
  has 1,000 unique string values of 32-bytes each. The "high cardinality" has
  100,000 unique values
* "Dense" (non-dictionary) and "Dictionary" variants

[See the full benchmark script.][11]

We show both single-threaded and multithreaded read performance. The test
machine is an Intel i9-9960X using gcc 8.3.0 (on Ubuntu 18.04) with 16 physical
cores and 32 virtual cores.

First, the writing benchmarks:

<div align="center">

> <img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903_parquet_write_perf.png"

Reviewer 2: Could you add units to the x-axis?  I'm assuming the time reported is seconds?  Or if it is unitless could to mention what the time is normalized to?

Author: Added a sentence to say it's all seconds. I'm not sure the absolute number is that meaningful here

     alt="Parquet write benchmarks"
     width="80%" class="img-responsive">
</div>

> Writing `arrow::DictionaryArray` is dramatically faster due to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing `DictionaryArray` is dramatically faster due to the
```

optimizations described above. We have achieved a small improvement in writing
dense (non-dictionary) binary arrays.

Then, the reading benchmarks:

<div align="center">

> <img src="{{ site.base-url }}/img/20190903_parquet_read_perf.png"

Reviewer 2: This plot also could benefit from units on the x-axis.
